Gartner, Inc. is an American marketing, market research and advisory firm providing information technology related insight headquartered in Stamford, Connecticut, United States. It was known as Gartner Group, Inc until 2001.
Research provided by Gartner is targeted at CIOs and senior IT leaders in industries that include government agencies, high-tech and telecom enterprises, professional services firms, and technology investors. Gartner clients include large corporations, government agencies, technology companies and the investment community. The company consists of Research, Executive Programs, Consulting and Events. Founded in 1979, Gartner has over 5,300 employees, including 1,280 in R&D, located in 85 countries.
Gartner uses hype cycles and magic quadrants for visualization of its market analysis results.


== History ==
The company was founded in 1979 by Gideon Gartner. Originally a private company, the Gartner Group was launched publicly in the 1980s, then acquired by Saatchi & Saatchi, a London-based advertising agency, and then acquired in 1990 by some of its executives, with funding from Bain Capital and Dun & Bradstreet. In 2001 the name was simplified to Gartner.
In the course of its growth, Gartner has acquired numerous companies providing related services, including Real Decisions (which became Gartner Measurement, now part of Gartner's consulting division), and Gartner Dataquest (Gartner's market research firm). It has also acquired a number of direct competitors, including NewScience in the late 1990s, Meta Group in 2005 and AMR Research and Burton Group in early 2010.
Gene Hall has been the CEO since August 2004.
In 2015, Gartner acquired Nubera, the business app discovery network that owns properties like GetApp, AppStorm, AppAppeal or CloudWork. Terms of the deal were not disclosed.


== See also ==

Gärtner
Soundview Technology Group, formerly Gartner Securities Corp.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website - Site includes an IT Glossary for IT technology terms and definitions.